Title: Why Model Selection Fails in Time Series Forecasting: An Empirical Study of Instability Across Data Regimes

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.01608v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 00:51:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Why Model Selection Fails in Time Series Forecasting: An Empirical Study of Instability Across Data Regimes 

Tahir Cetin Akinci, and Alfredo A. Martinez-Morales 

University of California Riverside, Bourns College of Engineering, Ce-Cert, Riverside, California, USA 

Emails: tahircetin.akinci@ucr.edu 

Abstract —Time series forecasting models often exhibit incon-sistent performance across datasets with varying statistical and structural properties. Despite the wide range of available fore-casting techniques, it remains unclear whether model selection can be reliably guided by simple data characteristics. This paper investigates why rule-based model selection fails in time series forecasting by analyzing the relationship between data-regime descriptors and model performance. A descriptor-based frame-work is introduced to characterize time series using measurable properties, including trend strength, seasonality, noise level, and temporal dependence. Based on these descriptors, a rule-based selection mechanism is formulated to map data regimes to candidate forecasting models. The approach is evaluated on multiple real-world datasets across different domains and fore-casting horizons. The results show that rule-based model selection achieves low accuracy, with correct model identification occurring in only a small fraction of cases. Significant discrepancies are observed between recommended and empirically optimal models, particularly in noisy and mixed regimes. Further analysis reveals that model performance is highly sensitive to both dataset charac-teristics and forecasting horizon, resulting in substantial ranking instability across scenarios. These findings explain why simple heuristic rules fail to generalize and demonstrate that forecasting performance cannot be reliably predicted using static, descriptor-based approaches. This study provides empirical evidence that model selection in time series forecasting is inherently context-dependent and highlights the need for more adaptive, data-driven strategies. 

Index Terms —Time Series Forecasting, Model Selection, Model Selection Failure, Data Regimes, Forecasting Instability, Non-Stationary Data, Rule-Based Methods 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Time series forecasting is a core component of modern data-driven systems, supporting decision-making in domains such as energy planning, financial analysis, transportation, and in-dustrial monitoring [1]. As forecasting workflows increasingly rely on training multiple models and evaluating them through automated pipelines, the reliability and generalization of fore-casting models have become critical challenges [2]. However, despite substantial progress in forecasting methodologies-ranging from classical statistical approaches such as ARIMA and exponential smoothing to machine learning and deep learning models-their performance remains highly sensitive to the characteristics of the underlying data [21], [22]. In practice, it is frequently observed that a model performs well on one dataset but fails on another, even when the datasets appear similar at first glance. This variability is not incidental, but instead reflects a mismatch between the assumptions embedded in the model and the statistical stcan captureecasting models inherently rely on assumptions such as stationarity, smoothness, linearity, and temporal dependency structures [5]. When these assumptions align with the data, models tend to perform reliably; when they do not, performance deteriorates. From a theoretical perspective, this behavior can be interpreted through concepts such as inductive bias, model capacity, and the bias–variance tradeoff. These principles help explain why models with strong structural assumptions perform well under stable and low-complexity regimes but fail under non-stationary or structurally complex conditions, where statistical properties evolve over time [6]. Existing research has predominantly focused on developing new models or improving predictive performance through architectural innovations and optimization strategies [7]. While these efforts have led to significant advances, they provide limited guidance on how to select appropriate models for new datasets. In many real-world applications, practitioners still rely on trial-and-error strategies, where multiple models are trained and evaluated retrospectively [8]. This approach is computationally expensive, difficult to reproduce, and often yields inconsistent results, particularly when datasets exhibit non-stationarity, structural breaks, intermittency, or complex seasonal patterns. A fundamental limitation in the literature is the lack of a systematic framework that connects data characteristics to model behavior. To the best of our knowledge, limited work systematically establishes a unified and interpretable link between data properties and model performance. Time series data are inherently heterogeneous, with varying levels of trend, seasonality, noise, sparsity, and regime shifts [21]. At the same time, forecasting models differ in their inductive biases, which determine the types of patterns they are capable of capturing. For example, linear models are often effective for stable and low-noise signals, while more flexible architectures, such as recurrent or attention-based models, are better suited for capturing nonlinear dependencies and long-range interactions [9]. However, these relationships are rarely formalized in a way that can guide model selection in practice, particularly in large-scale empirical forecasting settings [22]. To address this gap, this paper investigates why rule-based 

> arXiv:2605.01608v1 [eess.SP] 2 May 2026 2

model selection fails in time series forecasting. Rather than assuming that statistical descriptors can reliably determine the optimal model, the proposed framework is used as an analyt-ical tool to examine the relationship between measurable data characteristics and model behavior. The approach defines a set of quantitative descriptors capturing key statistical and struc-tural properties of time series data, including trend strength, seasonal structure, noise level, non-stationarity, intermittency, and structural breaks [6], [21]. These descriptors are used to represent data regimes, which are then analyzed in relation to the empirical performance of different model families. The framework integrates statistical diagnostics with model assumption profiling and operationalizes their interaction through structured selection rules, enabling a systematic evalu-ation of whether such mappings can generalize across datasets and forecasting horizons. This problem is closely related to broader challenges in empirical forecasting, where model per-formance is often inconsistent across datasets and evaluation settings [10], [22]. Unlike prior approaches, the proposed formulation attempts to unify statistical diagnostics and model assumption char-acteristics within a single operational selection mechanism. While similar ideas have been explored in machine learning-based forecasting and meta-learning approaches, these rela-tionships are rarely formalized in a transparent and inter-pretable manner [9]. This perspective allows the framework to be used as a baseline for analyzing the limitations of rule-based selection strategies in heterogeneous forecasting environments. The proposed approach is evaluated using a diverse set of real-world datasets spanning multiple domains, including energy systems, financial signals, and transportation data. The empirical results indicate that the relationship between data-regime descriptors and model performance is more complex than commonly assumed. While certain descriptors provide partial insight into model suitability, the overall effectiveness of rule-based model selection remains limited. In particular, discrepancies between recommended and empirically optimal models are observed across several dataset-horizon cases, and model rankings exhibit substantial variability depending on both data characteristics and forecasting horizon [10], [11], [22]. These findings suggest that regime-aware descriptors alone are insufficient to ensure reliable model selection and are consistent with broader evidence that forecasting performance is highly context-dependent and difficult to generalize across heterogeneous datasets [21]. This paper makes the following key contributions:  

> •

We introduce a data-regime-based representation of time series that captures essential statistical and structural properties relevant to forecasting.  

> •

We develop a structured framework that enables system-atic analysis of the relationship between data character-istics and model behavior.  

> •

We provide empirical evidence highlighting the limita-tions of rule-based model selection across heterogeneous datasets and forecasting horizons.  

> •

We demonstrate that model performance is highly context-dependent, influenced jointly by data regimes and forecasting horizon, leading to inherent selection instability. Overall, this study reframes model selection as a context-dependent problem and provides empirical insights into why simple, static selection rules fail to generalize across diverse time series scenarios. :contentReference[oaicite:0]index=0 II. D ATA -R EGIME CHARACTERIZATION AND FRAMEWORK 

FORMULATION 

This section formalizes the proposed data-regime-based framework and defines a mapping from measurable data characteristics to model suitability. 

A. Time Series Representation 

Let x(t) denote a univariate time series of length T :

x(t) = s(t) + n(t), t = 1 , 2, . . . , T (1) where s(t) captures structured dynamics and n(t) represents stochastic noise. Equation (1) motivates extracting descriptors that quantify both structure and uncertainty [12]. 

B. Data Regime Descriptor Vector 

Each series is mapped to a descriptor vector: 

r = [ r1, r 2, . . . , r d] (2) which summarizes the statistical regime. These descriptors are selected because they capture the dominant sources of variation in univariate time series, includ-ing trend, periodicity, stochastic variability, structural change, and sparsity. Together, they provide a compact yet expressive representation of the data regime while maintaining computa-tional tractability. Alternative descriptors exist, but the chosen set balances interpretability, generality, and efficiency across diverse datasets. Descriptor stability under noise, missing data, and short time series is further discussed in Section V.  

> •

Trend Strength ( r1):

r1 = | ˆβ|

Var( x) (3) where ˆβ is the slope of a linear fit. Equation (3) normal-izes trend magnitude by signal variability.  

> •

Seasonality ( r2):

r2 = max f ∈F P (f )

P 

> f

P (f ) (4) where P (f ) is spectral power. Equation (4) captures dominant periodicity via spectral concentration.  

> •

Noise Level ( r3):

r3 = σ2

> n

σ2

> x

(5) where σ2 

> n

is residual variance. Equation (5) measures the proportion of noise.  

> •

Non-Stationarity ( r4):

r4 = 1 − pADF (6) 3

where pADF is the ADF p-value. Equation (6) increases with non-stationarity.  

> •

Intermittency ( r5):

r5 = 1

T

> T

X

> t=1

I(|x(t)| < ϵ ) (7) where I is the indicator. Equation (7) quantifies sparsity.  

> •

Structural Breaks ( r6):

r6 = Ncp 

T (8) where Ncp is the number of change points. Equation (8) reflects regime shifts. Thus, 

r = f (x(t)) (9) where f (·) aggregates Eqs. (3)–(8) [13]–[15]. All descrip-tors are min–max normalized using statistics computed from the training set to ensure comparable scaling and consistent weighting across components. 

C. Model Compatibility Function 

Let M = {M1, . . . , M K } be candidate models. A compat-ibility score is defined as: 

ϕk(r) = wTk r (10) Equation (10) provides a linear scoring rule suitable for in-terpretable, rule-based selection. In the learned mapping vari-ant, the weights wk are estimated using historical forecasting tasks where model performance labels are available, enabling supervised or meta-learning-based calibration of compatibility scores. Alternative formulations include: 

ϕk(r) = σ(wTk r) (11) 

ϕk(r) = −∥ r − μk∥2 (12) Equation (11) enables probabilistic interpretation and is suit-able when model selection is framed as a classification task. Equation (12) measures similarity to a prototypical regime μk,which can be estimated from historical datasets where model 

Mk performs consistently well [16], [17]. 

D. Regime–Model Mapping 

Model selection is defined as: 

M ∗ = arg max   

> Mk∈M

ϕk(r) (13) Equation (13) selects the model with highest compatibility. The mapping can be implemented as:  

> •

Rule-based selection using expert-defined thresholds  

> •

Learned mapping using meta-learning, few-shot learning, or surrogate models trained on prior tasks This enables adaptation to both expert-driven and data-driven forecasting environments. 

E. Algorithmic Implementation 

While Eq. (13) defines the model selection process in a mathematical form, the practical implementation can be expressed as a rule-based selection algorithm. The procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1, which operationalizes the mapping from descriptor space to model choice. 

Algorithm 1 Regime-Based Model Selection Algorithm 

Require: Time series x(t)

Ensure: Selected forecasting model M ∗ 

> 1:

Compute descriptor vector r using Eq. (9)  

> 2:

if r3 is low and autocorrelation is high then  

> 3:

M ∗ ← ARIMA  

> 4:

else if r3 is high then  

> 5:

M ∗ ← Random Forest  

> 6:

else if r2 is high then  

> 7:

M ∗ ← ETS  

> 8:

else  

> 9:

M ∗ ← Naive  

> 10:

end if return M ∗

The algorithm provides a deterministic mapping between data-regime descriptors and candidate forecasting models, serving as an interpretable baseline for evaluating the effectiveness of rule-based model selection strategies. The rule set in Algorithm 1 is intentionally simple and reflects commonly used practitioner heuristics (e.g., low noise → ARIMA, high noise → RF, strong seasonality → ETS). The purpose of this formulation is not to design an optimal selector, but rather to provide a transparent and easily analyzable mechanism for understanding why static, descriptor-driven model selection fails to generalize across heterogeneous datasets and forecast-ing horizons. This simplified structure enables the instability and limitations of rule-based selection to be examined in a controlled and interpretable manner. 

F. Interpretability 

To better understand how data-regime descriptors influ-ence model selection, we introduce a local sensitivity-based interpretability measure. Specifically, the influence of each descriptor is quantified through the gradient of the scoring function with respect to the descriptor vector: 

Ii = ∂ϕ k(r)

∂r i

(14) Equation (14) measures the sensitivity of the model compat-ibility score to changes in descriptor ri, providing a first-order approximation of descriptor importance. A positive value of 

Ii indicates that increasing ri improves the compatibility of model k, whereas a negative value suggests that the descriptor negatively affects model suitability. This formulation enables a localized interpretation of the decision mechanism by capturing how small perturbations in the descriptor space influence model selection outcomes. Such gradient-based interpretations are consistent with established approaches for analyzing nonlinear decision functions, where 4

model outputs depend on complex interactions among input variables [18]. 

G. Computational Complexity 

The computational cost of the framework is dominated by descriptor extraction and model selection. Descriptor ex-traction involves operations such as spectral analysis and change-point detection, leading to an overall complexity of 

O(T log T ). The model selection step requires evaluating com-patibility scores across K models and d descriptors, resulting in a complexity of O(Kd ) [19], [20]. 

H. Framework Summary 

The workflow is: 1) Extract descriptors r using Eq. (9) 2) Compute ϕk(r) via Eqs. (10)–(12) 3) Select M ∗ using Eq. (13) 4) Interpret using Eq. (14) This yields a structured, interpretable, and reproducible model selection process. III. E XPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND VALIDATION 

This section evaluates the proposed data-regime-based model selection framework in terms of forecasting accuracy, robustness, and computational efficiency. 

A. Dataset Collection 

Experiments are conducted on four real-world datasets obtained from publicly available benchmark sources. The Tourism dataset corresponds to the well-known tourism de-mand dataset introduced by Hyndman et al. [21]. The En-ergy dataset is derived from the M4 forecasting competition dataset [22], which consists of a large collection of time series from multiple domains and frequencies. The Electricity dataset corresponds to the Electricity Load Diagrams 2011– 2014 dataset obtained from the UCI Machine Learning Repos-itory [23], containing consumption measurements from 370 clients recorded at 15-minute intervals. Finally, the PGCB dataset is obtained from the UCI Machine Learning Repository [24], providing hourly generation and demand data from the Bangladesh national grid. These datasets are selected to ensure diversity in statistical properties and to evaluate model performance across different application domains. All datasets are preprocessed using a consistent pipeline. Missing values are imputed using a forward-fill strategy, and each time series is standardized via z-normalization to elimi-nate scale differences. A rolling forecasting origin scheme is adopted to preserve temporal ordering and to ensure a fair evaluation of predictive performance. Table I summarizes the key statistical characteristics of the datasets used in this study. The reported metrics provide a compact representation of temporal structure, including short-term dependency through the first-lag autocorrelation, variabil-ity through noise variance, and long-term behavior through trend strength.                                    

> TABLE I STATISTICAL PROPERTIES OF THE DATASETS USED IN THE STUDY
> (ACF(1) DENOTES FIRST -LAG AUTOCORRELATION ; N OISE CORRESPONDS TO NORMALIZED RESIDUAL VARIANCE )
> Dataset Len HACF(1) Noise Trend Domain
> Energy 35000 1,24 0.95 9.98e-02 1.55e-05 Energy Tourism 12000 1,24 -0.01 2.01e+00 9.10e-06 Tourism Tetuan 52000 1,24 0.99 4.91e-03 9.41e-06 Power PGCB 90000 1,24 0.87 2.50e-01 2.82e-05 Grid

The datasets exhibit substantial heterogeneity across these dimensions. For instance, the Tetuan and Energy datasets are characterized by strong temporal dependence (ACF(1) close to one), while the Tourism dataset shows near-zero autocor-relation combined with significantly higher noise variance. Similarly, the magnitude of noise varies by several orders across datasets, indicating fundamentally different levels of predictability. This variability is consistent with well-known observations in large-scale forecasting benchmarks [10], [22]. This variation is not incidental but central to the problem addressed in this study. The presence of distinct statistical regimes allows us to examine whether simple descriptors such as autocorrelation and noise level can meaningfully guide model selection. At the same time, it highlights the intrinsic difficulty of identifying a single model that performs consistently well across all conditions. 

B. Forecasting Models 

Forecasting models are typically constructed based on un-derlying assumptions regarding stationarity, temporal depen-dence, and noise structure. Classical statistical models such as ARIMA and exponential smoothing explicitly rely on these assumptions, which form the foundation of traditional time series analysis [25]. We consider representative models from different families:  

> •

Statistical Models : ARIMA, Exponential Smoothing (ETS)  

> •

Machine Learning Models : Random Forest (RF), XG-Boost  

> •

Deep Learning Models : LSTM, GRU All models are tuned under a uniform time-series cross-validation protocol using a 3-fold rolling validation scheme to ensure consistent and fair comparison across model families. Hyperparameters are selected within predefined ranges applied uniformly to all models. Deep learning approaches are included to account for their ability to capture nonlinear and long-term temporal dependen-cies, providing a complementary perspective to statistical and machine learning models [9]. 

C. Baseline Strategies 

The proposed framework is evaluated against several base-line strategies that reflect widely adopted practices in time series forecasting:  

> •

Best Single Model : A fixed model applied uniformly across all datasets, representing a common but naive 5

approach that assumes a single model can generalize across heterogeneous data conditions.  

> •

Grid Search : Exhaustive hyperparameter optimization across multiple model families, serving as a performance upper bound under ideal tuning conditions.  

> •

AutoML : Automated model selection using AutoGluon v1.0 with the default best quality time-series preset, which integrates model selection and hyperparameter tuning into a unified pipeline [26]. These baselines capture different levels of model selection complexity, ranging from fixed-model assumptions to fully automated selection pipelines. Such strategies are consistent with established practices in forecasting, where both manual and automated approaches are used to address variability in model performance across datasets [21], [22]. All baseline methods are evaluated under identical prepro-cessing procedures and forecasting horizon settings to ensure a fair and consistent comparison. 

D. Evaluation Metrics 

Forecast accuracy is measured using RMSE and MAE: RMSE =

vuut 1

T

> T

X

> t=1

(yt − ˆyt)2 (15) MAE = 1

T

> T

X

> t=1

|yt − ˆyt| (16) In addition to accuracy, we evaluate performance variance across datasets and computational cost measured as total training time. All experiments are conducted using forecasting horizons of H ∈ { 1, 24 } to evaluate both short-term and long-term performance under consistent comparison settings. 

E. Experimental Procedure 

The evaluation follows: 1) Extract descriptor vector r (Section II) 2) Select model M ∗ using Eq. (13) 3) Train the selected model and generate forecasts 4) Compare results with baseline strategies All experiments are conducted under consistent preprocess-ing and validation settings. 

F. Results and Analysis 

The empirical evaluation reveals that forecasting perfor-mance varies substantially across datasets and models, with no single method consistently outperforming others. Relative RMSE distributions indicate significant overlap among model performances, suggesting the absence of a universally domi-nant forecasting approach. Furthermore, the proposed regime-based model selection strategy achieves limited predictive accuracy. The overall selection accuracy is observed to be approximately 12.5%, indicating that the mapping between simple statistical descrip-tors and optimal model choice is weak and unreliable across heterogeneous datasets. Performance variability across datasets remains high, and statistical tests do not indicate significant differences among competing models at the evaluated forecasting horizons. These findings suggest that model performance is highly dependent on dataset-specific characteristics and cannot be consistently inferred from low-dimensional descriptors such as autocorre-lation and noise level. From a computational perspective, minor reductions in training effort are observed in certain regimes due to the avoidance of unnecessarily complex models. However, these gains are not consistent across all datasets and do not com-pensate for the lack of reliable model selection accuracy. This failure suggests that low-dimensional descriptors such as autocorrelation and noise level are insufficient to capture the complex interactions that determine model performance. 

G. Decision Table for Model Selection 

Despite the limited predictive performance observed in the experiments, it is instructive to examine the commonly as-sumed relationship between data regimes and model families. Table II presents a heuristic mapping that reflects typical expectations in the literature regarding model suitability under different statistical conditions.                  

> TABLE II HEURISTIC MAPPING BETWEEN DATA REGIMES AND CANDIDATE
> MODELS
> Data Regime Descriptor Pattern Candidate Models
> Low Noise, High ACF Strong temporal dependence ARIMA, ETS Seasonal Periodic structure present ETS, LSTM High Noise High variability, weak structure Random Forest Non-Stationary Trend variation, structural change LSTM, GRU Sparse / Irregular Missing or irregular patterns Tree-based Models

Table II should be interpreted as an initial hypothesis rather than a validated rule. While these associations are widely assumed in prior studies and common forecasting practice, the experimental results in this work demonstrate that such mappings do not consistently lead to accurate model selection in practice. In particular, the low selection accuracy and over-lapping performance distributions indicate that the relationship between statistical descriptors and optimal forecasting models is more complex than suggested by simple regime definitions. To better understand the variability of model performance across datasets, the distribution of relative RMSE values is visualized in Fig. 1. The figure highlights the spread and overlap of model errors, providing insight beyond average performance metrics. In particular, the significant overlap between model error distributions indicates that differences in average performance are often not statistically decisive. This suggests that model rankings are highly sensitive to both dataset characteristics and forecasting horizon, leading to unstable and non-generalizable selection outcomes. The presence of multiple models with near-identical normalized RMSE values further supports the 6 

> Fig. 1. Distribution of relative RMSE across models. RMSE values are normalized with respect to the best-performing model for each dataset and forecasting horizon. The dashed reference level at RMSE = 1 corresponds to the best model per dataset-horizon.

conclusion that simple descriptor-based rules are insufficient to reliably distinguish between competing forecasting models in heterogeneous settings. IV. R ESULTS AND COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS 

This section presents an empirical evaluation of forecasting performance across multiple datasets, followed by an analysis of model selection behavior and its limitations. The objective is not only to compare predictive accuracy, but also to assess whether simple statistical descriptors can reliably guide model selection. 

A. Overall Model Performance 

We begin by evaluating forecasting accuracy using the RMSE metric. Table III presents the absolute performance values across all datasets.                         

> TABLE III RMSE C OMPARISON OF FORECASTING MODELS ACROSS DATASETS
> Dataset Naive Linear RF ARIMA
> Tetuan 0.2620 1.4856 0.2958 0.3042 Tourism 1.8259 1.0520 1.0526 1.0511
> Energy 0.0770 0.5947 0.1501 0.0815 PGCB 0.2390 1.4817 0.1935 0.2015

The results indicate that no single model consistently out-performs others across all datasets. While ARIMA achieves the lowest error in the Tourism dataset, simpler models such as Naive outperform more complex approaches in highly autocorrelated datasets such as Tetuan and Energy. In contrast, the Random Forest model performs best in the PGCB dataset, which exhibits higher variability. In addition, the relative closeness of RMSE values across several models suggests that performance differences are often within a narrow margin, making it difficult to identify a statistically dominant model based solely on average error metrics. This observation further motivates the need for distributional and pairwise analyses, rather than relying exclusively on aggregated performance values. Although differences exist, the performance gaps between competing models are often small, suggesting that model rank-ings are unstable and dataset-dependent rather than universally consistent. To further examine the relative dominance of fore-casting models, pairwise comparisons are conducted across all dataset-horizon combinations. The results are summarized in Fig. 2, which quantifies how often one model outperforms another in terms of RMSE. Furthermore, the absence of strong dominance patterns in the pairwise comparison matrix indicates that model superiority is highly context-dependent. In many cases, the probability of one model outperforming another remains close to random, reinforcing the notion that performance differences are not robust across varying data conditions.  

> Fig. 2. Pairwise win rate matrix between forecasting models. Each entry represents the proportion of dataset-horizon cases in which the model in the row achieves a lower RMSE than the model in the column. Values close to 0.5 indicate no consistent dominance, while values above 0.5 suggest relative superiority. The absence of uniformly high values across rows indicates that no model consistently outperforms others.

To enable a fair comparison across datasets with different scales, RMSE values are normalized relative to the best-performing model in each dataset. The resulting relative RMSE values are presented in Table IV. The normalized results highlight two key observations. First, the linear model consistently exhibits significantly higher error across all datasets, indicating its inability to capture complex temporal dynamics. Second, the remaining models show relatively small performance differences, particularly in the Tourism and PGCB datasets, where multiple models achieve nearly identical performance levels. These findings suggest that model performance is both dataset-dependent and weakly separable, meaning that the 7                          

> TABLE IV RELATIVE RMSE A CROSS DATASETS (N ORMALIZED TO BEST MODEL PER DATASET )
> Dataset Naive Linear RF ARIMA
> Tetuan 1.0000 5.6698 1.1290 1.1610 Tourism 1.7372 1.0009 1.0014 1.0000
> Energy 1.0000 7.7260 1.9498 1.0587 PGCB 1.2353 7.6593 1.0000 1.0414

distinction between competing models is often marginal. This reinforces the difficulty of identifying a universally optimal forecasting model based on simple statistical descriptors.These findings suggest that model performance is highly dataset-dependent, with substantial overlap among competing meth-ods. 

B. Evaluation of Regime-Based Model Selection 

We next evaluate the effectiveness of regime-based model selection rules. Table V summarizes the accuracy of rule-based mapping between statistical regimes and selected models.                 

> TABLE V ACCURACY OF REGIME -B ASED MODEL SELECTION RULES
> Regime Rule-Based Model Accuracy N
> Low Noise ARIMA 0.2500 4High Noise RF 0.0000 2Mixed Naive 0.0000 2

The results in Table V demonstrate that the regime-based selection strategy performs poorly, with an overall accuracy of approximately 12.5%. In particular, the method fails com-pletely in high-noise and mixed regimes, where none of the rule-based selections match the empirically best-performing models. Even in low-noise regimes, the accuracy remains limited, indicating that simple statistical descriptors such as autocorrelation and noise level are insufficient for reliable model selection. This limitation cannot be attributed solely to data scarcity. Although the number of samples within each regime is rela-tively small, the consistently low accuracy across all regimes suggests a more fundamental mismatch between descriptor-based rules and actual model behavior. These findings indicate that the relationship between time-series characteristics and optimal forecasting models is more complex than assumed by simple heuristic mappings. To further examine this mismatch, the discrepancy between rule-based model recommendations and empirically optimal models is visualized in Fig. 3. As shown in Fig. 3, deviations from the optimal model are frequent and often substantial, confirming that rule-based selection decisions are not only inaccurate but also inconsistent across different dataset-horizon scenarios. The magnitude and variability of these deviations further support the conclusion that simple descriptor-based rules fail to capture the complex interactions governing model performance.  

> Fig. 3. Difference between rule-based model selection and empirically best-performing models across dataset-horizon cases. A value of zero indicates correct model selection, while non-zero values represent deviations from the optimal choice. Larger deviations correspond to greater mismatch between the rule-based recommendation and actual model performance.

These findings suggest that simple descriptors such as auto-correlation and noise level are insufficient to reliably determine the optimal forecasting model. To quantify the effectiveness of the rule-based selection strategy, the accuracy of model recommendations across dif-ferent data regimes is presented in Fig. 4.  

> Fig. 4. Accuracy of regime-based model selection across different data regimes. The overall selection accuracy is low, with correct predictions occurring in only a small fraction of cases. The method performs slightly better in medium-noise regimes but fails entirely in high-noise and low-noise conditions.

As shown in Fig. 4, the selection accuracy remains low across all regimes, with an overall performance of approx-imately 12.5%. The method fails completely in high-noise 8

and low-noise regimes and achieves only limited success under medium-noise conditions. These results indicate that simple rule-based mappings are insufficient for reliable model selection. Despite the low selection accuracy, it is important to ex-amine whether this limitation arises from the inadequacy of the rule-based framework or from the intrinsic variability of model performance across datasets. As shown in Fig. 5, several models exhibit significant rank variability across dataset-horizon cases. In particular, linear models demonstrate high instability, while simpler models such as Naive show relatively stable behavior. This variability indicates that model performance is highly sensitive to data characteristics, which partially explains the difficulty of reli-able model selection using simple heuristic rules.  

> Fig. 5. Model ranking instability across dataset-horizon cases, measured by rank variance. Higher values indicate that model performance is inconsistent across different scenarios, making reliable model selection more challenging.

The observed instability in model ranking suggests that performance may depend on additional factors beyond regime descriptors. In particular, the forecasting horizon is expected to influence model effectiveness. To investigate this effect, model performance across different horizons is analyzed in Fig. 6. As shown in Fig. 6, model performance is highly sensitive to the forecasting horizon. Certain models exhibit strong per-formance in short-term forecasting but degrade as the horizon increases, while others demonstrate improved stability over longer horizons. This variation explains the ranking instability observed in Fig. 5 and highlights the limitations of static model selection strategies that do not account for horizon-dependent behavior. 

C. Statistical Significance Analysis 

To assess whether observed performance differences are statistically meaningful, a Friedman test is conducted across datasets. The results are presented in Table VI.  

> Fig. 6. Horizon-dependent model performance measured by mean relative RMSE. The results show that model rankings vary significantly between short-term and long-term forecasting scenarios. While some models (e.g., Linear and SeasonalNaive) perform poorly at short horizons, their performance improves at longer horizons, whereas others exhibit the opposite trend.

The test results indicate that the null hypothesis of equal model performance cannot be rejected ( p = 0 .3476 ). This suggests that the observed differences in RMSE values are not statistically significant, reinforcing the conclusion that no single model consistently dominates across datasets. 

D. Interpretation of Model Selection Behavior 

For completeness, Table II presents the commonly assumed mapping between statistical regimes and candidate models.        

> TABLE VI STATISTICAL COMPARISON OF FORECASTING MODELS USING THE
> FRIEDMAN TEST
> Test p-value
> Friedman Test 0.3476

The Friedman test results indicate that the null hypothesis of equal model performance cannot be rejected ( p = 0 .3476 ). This suggests that, despite observable differences in RMSE values, the performance variations among forecasting models are not statistically significant. This result reinforces the findings of Tables III and IV, where model performances exhibit substantial overlap across datasets. It also supports the conclusion drawn from Table V that simple regime-based rules are insufficient for reliable model selection. Overall, the lack of statistical significance highlights the inherent difficulty of identifying a universally optimal fore-casting model using low-dimensional statistical descriptors. Although such heuristic mappings are widely used in the literature, the empirical results of this study demonstrate that they do not consistently lead to correct model selection 9

decisions. This discrepancy highlights the complexity of the relationship between time-series characteristics and model performance. 

E. Discussion 

The results presented in this section collectively indicate that forecasting model performance is highly context-dependent. The lack of statistically significant differences, combined with low regime-selection accuracy, suggests that simple rule-based approaches are insufficient for reliable model selection. Rather than identifying a universally optimal model, the findings emphasize the inherent instability of model rankings across datasets. This highlights the need for more adaptive, data-driven approaches that can capture higher-order depen-dencies beyond low-dimensional statistical descriptors. From a practical perspective, these results caution against over-reliance on heuristic rules and underscore the importance of validation-driven model selection strategies. While regime-based reasoning provides interpretability, it must be comple-mented with empirical validation to ensure robust forecasting performance. V. D ISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS 

This section synthesizes the empirical findings, explains their implications, and clarifies the limitations and scope of the proposed framework. It provides a detailed interpretation of the experimental results and discusses the practical implica-tions and limitations of the proposed data-regime-based model selection framework. 

A. Interpretation of Results 

The results presented in Section IV demonstrate that fore-casting performance is strongly dependent on the statistical and structural properties of the underlying data. The results indicate that the proposed framework does not consistently improve performance and instead reveals the limitations of rule-based model selection. This aligns with the theoretical expectation that inductive biases determine model suitability under different statistical regimes. One key observation is that no single forecasting model con-sistently outperforms others across all datasets. Instead, model effectiveness varies systematically with regime characteristics such as non-stationarity, noise level, and seasonal complexity. This confirms that model selection should not be treated as a static problem, but rather as a data-dependent decision process. The regime-aware selection mechanism attempts to capture this dependency, but the empirical results show that such mappings are not sufficient for reliable model selection. In stable regimes, simpler statistical models provide competitive performance with lower computational cost. In contrast, com-plex regimes benefit from high-capacity models such as LSTM and GRU, which are capable of modeling nonlinear and long-range dependencies. These observations are consistent with prior findings in em-pirical forecasting research, which similarly report that model performance varies substantially across datasets and horizons, and that simple heuristics often fail to generalize. The present study extends this line of work by providing a structured, descriptor-based analysis that makes the sources of instability explicit and interpretable. 

B. Practical Implications 

The proposed framework has direct implications for real-world forecasting applications. By enabling model selection prior to training, it does not eliminate the need for validation-driven model selection and cannot replace empirical evaluation in practice. This is particularly valuable in large-scale systems where training multiple models is impractical. For instance, in energy forecasting pipelines with hourly data, the framework can significantly reduce daily retraining costs by selecting simpler models when complex architectures are unnecessary. Furthermore, the framework’s interpretability provides insight into why a model is selected, allowing practitioners to bet-ter understand the relationship between data characteristics and model behavior. This supports more transparent and trustworthy forecasting pipelines, especially in high-stakes applications. Based on the empirical findings, practitioners should avoid relying solely on descriptor-based rules for model selection. Instead, the framework is best used as a preliminary screening tool that indicates when simple models are likely sufficient and when more flexible architectures should be considered. Empirical validation therefore remains essential for ensuring robust and reliable deployment in operational forecasting environments. 

C. Generalization and Transferability 

The proposed framework is designed to generalize across application domains by relying on domain-agnostic statisti-cal descriptors that capture fundamental properties of time series data. However, the experimental results indicate that the mapping between data regimes and model families does not consistently generalize across different application domains. This limitation is evidenced by the observed variability in model performance across datasets, suggesting that similar statistical characteristics do not necessarily lead to consistent model behavior in heterogeneous forecasting environments. However, the generalization capability depends on the re-liability of descriptor extraction and the representativeness of the datasets used during development. In highly specialized domains, additional domain-specific descriptors may be re-quired. 

D. Limitations 

Despite its advantages, the proposed framework has several limitations. First, the accuracy of model selection depends on the quality of the descriptor vector. Descriptor estimation becomes less reliable in short time series (e.g., fewer than 100 observations), in the presence of missing data, irregular sampling, or high noise levels, which may lead to suboptimal model selection. Second, the current formulation relies on predefined descrip-tors, which may not fully capture complex temporal patterns. 10 

Extending the framework with learned representations could improve performance in such cases. Third, the framework assumes that historical relationships between data regimes and model performance remain stable. This limitation is common in meta-learning and model selec-tion literature, and may not hold in rapidly evolving systems, requiring periodic adaptation of the selection rules. Finally, while the framework reduces computational cost compared to exhaustive search methods, it does not eliminate the need for model training entirely. From a deployment perspective, real-time descriptor extrac-tion may be challenging in streaming environments, where latency and computational constraints limit feature compu-tation. Real-time deployment may also require incremental descriptor updates rather than full recomputation to maintain efficiency under streaming conditions. These limitations do not undermine the value of the framework but instead highlight the inherent difficulty of reliable model selection in heterogeneous time series environments. 

E. Threats to Validity 

Several factors may affect the validity of the findings. 

Internal validity may be influenced by the choice of descriptor definitions and the specific implementation of change-point and spectral analysis methods. External validity is limited by the number of datasets and model families considered, which may restrict generalization to broader forecasting set-tings. Construct validity may be affected by the assumption that low-dimensional descriptors adequately represent complex temporal structures. These threats should be considered when interpreting the empirical results. 

F. Future Work 

Future research can extend the proposed framework in several directions. Incorporating meta-learning techniques may enable adaptive learning of regime–model mappings. In ad-dition, integrating representation-learning methods could im-prove descriptor extraction for complex, high-dimensional time series. Extending the framework to multivariate time series and capturing cross-series dependencies remains an open chal-lenge. Furthermore, extending the approach to probabilistic forecasting and uncertainty quantification is another promising direction that could enhance decision-making under uncer-tainty. Another promising direction is to explicitly model forecasting-horizon dependence, as the empirical results show that model rankings can change substantially between short-term and long-term horizons. 

G. Summary 

Overall, the findings demonstrate that forecasting perfor-mance is strongly dependent on data-regime characteristics, but cannot be reliably inferred from simple descriptor-based rules. The empirical results show that model rankings vary across datasets and forecasting horizons, leading to unstable and often misleading model selection outcomes. Rather than providing a definitive solution, the proposed framework serves as an interpretable baseline that exposes the limitations of rule-based selection strategies. These observa-tions highlight the need for more adaptive, data-driven ap-proaches that can capture the complex and context-dependent nature of model performance. VI. C ONCLUSION 

This study examined the feasibility of rule-based model selection in time series forecasting through a data-regime characterization framework. The proposed approach aimed to link measurable statistical descriptors, such as autocorrelation, noise level, and structural properties, to model behavior in a systematic and interpretable manner. The empirical analysis, conducted across multiple real-world datasets and forecasting horizons, shows that rule-based model selection achieves limited effectiveness. The results indicate that correct model identification occurs only in a small fraction of cases, with substantial discrepancies observed be-tween recommended models and empirically optimal choices. These findings suggest that simple mappings between data descriptors and model families are insufficient to capture the complexity of real-world forecasting scenarios. Further investigation reveals that model performance is highly sensitive to both dataset characteristics and forecast-ing horizon. Significant variability in model rankings across dataset-horizon combinations indicates that no single model consistently outperforms others. This instability directly im-pacts the reliability of deterministic model selection rules and explains the observed low selection accuracy. Despite these limitations, the study provides several impor-tant insights. First, it demonstrates that widely used statistical descriptors, while informative, do not provide a complete basis for reliable model selection. Second, it highlights the critical role of forecasting horizon as an often-overlooked factor influencing model effectiveness. Third, it establishes that model selection should be treated as a context-dependent problem rather than a static decision based on fixed rules. The primary contribution of this work lies in providing a structured empirical evaluation of rule-based model selec-tion and exposing its limitations under realistic conditions. Rather than proposing a universally optimal selection strat-egy, the study clarifies the boundaries within which heuristic approaches can be expected to operate effectively. These findings motivate the need for more adaptive and data-driven model selection mechanisms that can account for interactions between data structure, noise characteristics, and forecasting horizon. Future work will focus on developing learning-based selection strategies, extending the analysis to larger benchmark datasets, and investigating multivariate and probabilistic forecasting settings. Overall, the findings high-light that reliable model selection requires adaptive, data-driven mechanisms rather than static rules derived from low-dimensional descriptors. REFERENCES [1] M. K. Saravana, M. S. Roopa, J. S. Arunalatha, and K. R. Venu-gopal, ”Transformers for multivariate time series forecasting: Comprehen-sive analysis, challenges, research opportunities, and future prospects,” 11 

IEEE Access , vol. 14, pp. 11424–11457, 2026, doi: 10.1109/AC-CESS.2026.3654408. [2] B. Hassler, F. M. Hoffman, R. Beadling, E. Blockley, B. Huang, J. Lee, V. Lembo, J. Lewis, J. Lu, L. Madaus, E. Malinina et al. , ”Sys-tematic benchmarking of climate models: Methodologies, applications, and new directions,” Reviews of Geophysics , vol. 64, no. 1, 2026, doi: 10.1029/2025RG000891. [3] S. Makridakis, E. Spiliotis, and V. Assimakopoulos, ”The M4 Com-petition: Results, findings, conclusion and way forward,” International Journal of Forecasting , vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 802–808, Oct. 2018. [4] R. J. Hyndman and G. Athanasopoulos, Forecasting: Principles and Practice , 2nd ed. Melbourne, Australia: OTexts, 2018. [5] S. Mohammed, L. Budach, M. Feuerpfeil, N. Ihde, A. Nathansen, N. Noack, H. Patzlaff, F. Naumann, and H. Harmouch, ”The effects of data quality on machine learning performance on tabular data,” Information Systems , vol. 132, p. 102549, Jul. 2025, doi: 10.1016/j.is.2025.102549. [6] J. D. Hamilton, Time Series Analysis . Princeton, NJ, USA: Princeton University Press, 1994. [7] N. Krishnan, ”AI agents: Evolution, architecture, and real-world applica-tions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.12687 , Mar. 2025. [8] D. G. Knapen, M. van Kruchten, D. J. A. de Groot, K. E. Broek-man, and R. S. N. Fehrmann, ”Artificial intelligence for clinical trial design, conduct, and analysis: A narrative review,” ESMO Real World Data and Digital Oncology , vol. 11, p. 100682, Mar. 2026, doi: 10.1016/j.esmorw.2026.100682. [9] K. Bandara, C. Bergmeir, and H. Smyl, ”Forecasting across time series databases using recurrent neural networks on groups of similar series,” 

Expert Systems with Applications , vol. 140, p. 112896, Feb. 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2019.112896. [10] S. Makridakis et al. , ”The M5 accuracy competition: Results, findings, and conclusions,” International Journal of Forecasting , vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 1341–1364, Oct. 2022. [11] C. Bergmeir, R. J. Hyndman, and J. M. Ben´ ıtez, ”A note on the validity of cross-validation for evaluating autoregressive time series prediction,” 

Computational Statistics & Data Analysis , vol. 120, pp. 70–83, Apr. 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.csda.2017.11.003. [12] T. Subba Rao, ”Canonical factor analysis and stationary time series models,” Sankhy¯ a: The Indian Journal of Statistics, Series B , vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 256–271, Aug. 1976. [13] X. Wang, K. Smith, and R. J. Hyndman, ”Characteristic-based forecast-ing for time series data,” International Journal of Forecasting , vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 217–233, Apr. 2006, doi: 10.1016/j.ijforecast.2005.03.009. [14] M. B. Priestley, Spectral Analysis and Time Series . London, U.K.: Academic Press, 1981. [15] S. E. Said and D. A. Dickey, ”Testing for unit roots in autoregressive-moving average models of unknown order,” Biometrika , vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 599–606, Dec. 1984, doi: 10.1093/biomet/71.3.599. [16] T. S. Talagala, R. J. Hyndman, and G. Athanasopoulos, ”Meta-learning how to forecast time series,” International Journal of Forecasting , vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 1–22, 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.ijforecast.2018.01.003. [17] S. Mohshini et al. , ”Evaluation-free time-series forecasting model se-lection via temporal meta-learning,” ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data , vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1–25, 2024. [18] J. Montavon, S. Lapuschkin, A. Binder, S. Bach, and K. R. M¨ uller, ”Explaining nonlinear classification decisions with deep Taylor decom-position,” Pattern Recognition , vol. 65, pp. 211–222, May 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2016.11.008. [19] J. Lin, E. Keogh, L. Wei, and S. Lonardi, ”Experiencing SAX: A novel symbolic representation of time series,” Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 107–144, Oct. 2007, doi: 10.1007/s10618-007-0064-z. [20] C. Faloutsos, R. N. Wright, and Y. Matias, ”Forecasting, similarity, and surprises,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data , 1997, pp. 429–440. [21] Hyndman, R. J., and Athanasopoulos, G., Forecasting: Principles and Practice, OTexts, 2018. [22] Makridakis, S., Spiliotis, E., and Assimakopoulos, V., The M4 Competi-tion: Results, findings, conclusion and way forward, International Journal of Forecasting, 2018. [23] Dua, D., and Graff, C., UCI Machine Learning Repository: Electricity Load Diagrams 2011–2014, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/ElectricityLoadDiagrams20112014 [24] UCI Machine Learning Repository, PGCB Hourly Gen-eration Dataset (Bangladesh), 2025. [Online]. Available: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/1175/pgcb+hourly+generation+ dataset+(bangladesh) [25] G. E. P. Box, G. M. Jenkins, G. C. Reinsel, and G. M. Ljung, Time Series Analysis: Forecasting and Control , 5th ed. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2015. [26] N. Erickson et al. , ”AutoGluon-Tabular: Robust and accurate AutoML for structured data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.06505 , Mar. 2020.